Running LifeLines Genealogy Software for Windows
  Last Edited: 2003-03-05 by Perry Rapp
  Updated:     2005-10-20 by Larry Hamilton

(This presumes you have installed it, per the
Install.LifeLines.Windows.txt document)

1) Double-click on the shortcut on your desktop for
LifeLines.  A Console (or "DOS") window should open, with
the title bar giving the LifeLines version, and with a
prompt in the middle of the screen, asking "What directory
holds the LifeLines database ?  enter path:"

2) Enter a name for your first LifeLines database.  It must
be a valid Windows directory name (no slashes, no colon, no
quotation marks...).  LifeLines will then create & open this
brand new empty database for you.

This will be a directory underneath your lifelines database
directory, and you can rename it at any time later by simply
renaming the directory -- of course you should not do this
whilst you have that database open in LifeLines.

3) At this point, your best course of action is to begin
reading the users manual. This is available in the Documentation
directory under the main Lifelines directory. The name of the
manual is ll-userguide, and comes in text, PDF, HTML, and XML
versions.

This manual explains how to proceed, adding data, and general
usage of the program.

You would be well-advised to read the previous Introduction
to GEDCOM section as well. See the References below for more 
information on GEDCOM. 

4) When adding a new record (eg, a new person to the
database), LifeLines will cause Notepad (or the text editor
specified in lines.cfg)  to appear.  Enter your information in
Notepad -- page eight of the manual discusses entering your
first person:

After you have entered the information into Notepad, save
the document by choosing Save from the File menu, and then
close Notepad (eg, Alt-F4, or click the X). Switch back to 
LifeLines if necessary, and click on its titlebar if it is not
highlighted. It will have a prompt displayed, asking whether
or not you really wish to add the new person. Normally you
respond y and add your new person.

5) Note on menu items: LifeLines now has significantly more
menu choices in many screens than were present in older
versions of LifeLines.  Many screens cannot fit all choices
on screen at one time. If you see the choice "? Other menu
choices" in the lower left, as the second to last choice ("q
quit" is always the last choice), then this indicates there
is more than one page of menu choices. You can view all
pages of menu choices by pressing the ? key repeatedly; this
will cycle through the pages of choices one at a time.

There is also an indication at the top of the menu such as
  (pg 1/3)
  
to tell you that you are viewing the first page of three
pages of menu choices for the current screen.

6) If you want to read in a GEDCOM file, the default configuration
is to look for it in the lifelines directory. To specify a
different directory, change the InputPath:= setting.

7) If you wish to change the colors in the console window
(the "DOS" window), the following explains how. (This is 
actually not part of LifeLines, but is general DOS on 
Windows trivia).

Run the program (This may also be done for the specific shortcut
by right-clicking the shortcut and modifying the screen and 
font colors on the Colors tab.).

Left-click in the upper-left corner (the system menu, which
is probably a little red box with LL in it).  You should get
a popup menu, with Move, Size, Minimize, Maximize, (a
horizontal bar), Close, Edit, Properties.  Click on
Properties.  You should get a tabbed dialog - click on the
color tab.  Set the upper two radio button choices -
foreground & background color - and when you hit Ok, it
should ask you if this is a change for this window only (ie,
only this time you're running it), or if it is a permanent
change for this shortcut (ie, you'll see the new colors
every time from now on). Choose permanent - you can always
change them later the same way.

8) If you do not want to have to specify the database to 
use each time you start LifeLines, you can modify the 
command used to start LifeLines. Using the example of 
C:\lifelines, change the Target line of the shortcut tab from 
c:\lifelines\Lines.exe to 
c:\lifelines\Lines.exe c:\lifelines\Databases\database name. 
Where database name is the name of the directory under the 
Databases folder with the desired database.

9) To use a text editor other than Windows Notepad, edit 
the LLEDITOR:= property in the lines.cfg file to the path 
and executable for the desired text editor. Please note 
that a text editor is not the same as a word processor, 
such as MS-Word(TM). A text editor does not add special 
formatting, such as bold or underline, it just displays 
it like you type it, like a typewriter.

There are many good free text editors available on the internet. 
One that has both Linux and Windows versions that functions 
the same on both operating systems is Vim, http://www.vim.org/.
Vim has built-in syntax highlighting for both the entry of 
GEDCOM, and for the LifeLines Report language. Some Windows 
users may find that Vim has a steep learning curve.
The setting for Vim would be
LLEDITOR:=

Another good text editor with both a free and paid versions is 
NoteTab, http:www.notetab.com/. It must be noted that while 
this is an excellent text editor, it has a tabbed interface and 
all text editors with a tabbed interface, on any operating 
system, will not send back to LifeLines that it is finished 
until the entire editor is closed, not just the tab with the 
database entry.
The setting for NoteTab Light that avoids issues with multiple 
tabs is (Other tabbed editors would need to support a similar 
command line.):
LLEDITOR:=C:\NoteTab\NoteTab.exe /INI=LifeLines.ini

10) LifeLines' Report Language is very powerful. While there 
are many reports included with LifeLines, the Report Language 
allows the user to create their own, or modify existing reports. 
The report manual is in the Documentation directory. The name of 
the manual is ll-reportmanual, and comes in text, PDF, HTML, 
and XML versions. See the report newuser.ll in the Programs 
directory for an example of a simple report. Run it from the 
LifeLines menu to help verify that your lines.cfg settings 
are correct.

NOTE: When running LifeLines reports, you will be asked for 
the filename to save the file. If you save all your reports to 
the Outputs directory, be careful not to use the name of a 
report you wish to keep. There is no warning if you are about 
to overwrite an existing file.

11) Suggested supporting programs. These are not supported by
the LifeLines developers, but are included for completeness.

On Linux/Unix, all of the supporting programs needed to process
the various report data formats is usually included.

For Windows users, additional free software may be needed to 
easily access this data.

Many of the reports, such as famtree.ll, and ps-anc.ll, or
ps-circle.ll export in PostScript format. These are attractive
reports and suitable for quality printing.

To work with Postscript data, you will need to download the free 
GhostScript program, http://www.ghostscript.com/. This allows you
to print and/or convert Postscript files to PDF, that can be
viewed in the Adobe Reader program,
http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/readstep2.html.

An additional program to simplify converting Postscript reports 
to PDF using the Send to menu instead of the GhostScript command 
line is MakePDF: http://www.lexacorp.com.pg/makepdf.html.

The other report formats, LaTeX/TeX and NROFF, is included for
those who want to know, and those who are interested in the
challenge to make it work.

LaTeX/TeX, pronounced "tek", is a text file with specialized markup
language for printed documents. Some of the reports that export to
LaTeX/TeX format, do not have any other options at this time.
To work with TeX and LaTeX format you will need to download TeX,
http://www.miktex.org/. A minimal installation is about 25 MB, a 
large installation is 64 MB. and a full installation is 250 MB. 
A NoteTab library for ease of working with MikTeX is available here:
http://texlips.hypermart.net/index.html.

There is a stand-alone LaTeX/TeX to RTF converter:
http://sourceforge.net/projects/latex2rtf/. It is easy to use.

Please note that any LaTeX/TeX conversion still requires some
knowledge of LaTeX and editing of the file to get the desired end
results.

NROFF is specially formatted text used for man pages, the most
common help system on Unix like operating systems. Most of the
reports that output in NROFF format also have an RTF version
To work with NROFF date, you will need the Perl script man2html:
http://www.oac.uci.edu/indiv/ehood/man2html.html. This will require
that you install Perl: http://www.activestate.com/Products/ActivePerl/.


References:

LifeLines on the web:
  https://lifelines.github.io/lifelines/

Mailing list:
  To subscribe to the list, send email to
        listserv@listserv.nodak.edu
    with the BODY of the mail containing
        SUB LINES-L your full name

  Archives:
        http://listserv.nodak.edu/archives/lines-l.html

GEDCOM:

Version 5.5 is the last official version. 
There is a draft version 5.5.1. 
There is also a draft version of GEDCOM 6, which is an XML format, 
that LifeLines will not support, except perhaps as export.

Paul McBride's HTML version:
http://homepages.rootsweb.com/~pmcbride/gedcom/55gctoc.htm

Robert Simm's PDF versions:
http://www.math.clemson.edu/~rsimms/genealogy/ll/gedcom55.pdf
http://www.math.clemson.edu/~rsimms/genealogy/ll/ged551-5.pdf
